Add Java Metric Systems Compared blog post (#4512)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/java-metric-systems-compared/index.md

---
title: OpenTelemetry Java Metrics Performance Comparison
linkTitle: Java Metric Systems Compared
date: 2024-05-20
author: '[Jack Berg](https://github.com/jack-berg) (New Relic)'
cSpell:ignore: Asaf dropwizard hashcodes Mesika Sonoma
---

Arguably the biggest value proposition of OpenTelemetry is that it aims to be a
language agnostic, general purpose observability standard. By providing tools
for traces, metrics, and logs (and profiling coming soon!), and implementations
across many popular languages, OpenTelemetry reduces the cognitive load of
polyglot teams by providing one vocabulary and one toolkit.

While that’s all true, today I’d like to zoom in on a specific signal and

> language, and talk about the performance of the [opentelemetry-java][] metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
language, and talk about the performance of the [OpenTelemetry Java][] metrics
```

serialize the state of each `AggregatorHandle` according to whatever protocol is
used to export. Over the past year or so, we’ve done some heavy lifting to
optimize the memory allocations of the collect cycle. The optimization comes
from the recognition that metric
[exporters will never be called concurrently](/docs/specs/otel/metrics/sdk/#exportbatch).
If we periodically read metric state and send it to the exporter to serialize,
and ensure we wait until that export completes before reading metric state
again, then we can safely reuse all the data structures used to pass the metric
state to the exporter. Of course some metric readers (like the prometheus metric
reader) may read the metric state concurrently. For these, we prioritize safety
and correctness over optimized memory allocations.

The result is a configurable option unique to opentelemetry-java called
`MemoryMode`. `MetricReaders` (or their associated `MetricExporter`) specify
what their memory mode is based on whether they read metric state concurrently
or not. Right now you opt into the optimized memory behavior (which we call
`MemoryMode.reusable_data`) via an

> [environment variable](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure#exporters).

Author: Blocked on #4377. I see that is missing approval from java approvers, so will take a look at that now!

> [environment variable](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure#exporters).

Reviewer: Would be great to have the doc change merged first, but this should not block this blog post from being published.

**Figure 3:** Record to exponential bucket histogram benchmark results.

The following graphs summarize the results for the collect and collect with
export benchmarks:

![collect from counter benchmark results](collect-counter.png)

**Figure 4:** Collect from counter benchmark results.

![collect from explicit bucket histogram benchmark results](collect-explicit-histogram.png)

**Figure 5:** Collect from explicit bucket histogram results.

![collect from exponential bucket histogram benchmark results](collect-expo-histogram.png)

**Figure 6:** Collect from exponential bucket histogram benchmark results.

### Conclusions

On the record side, micrometer and prometheus have an 11ns advantage for
counters when attributes are known ahead of time, avoiding map lookups by using
bound instruments to get direct references to aggregated state (not supported by
OpenTelemetry). Despite this, OpenTelemetry has a 32ns advantage for explicit
bucket histograms. This is likely due to micrometer and prometheus attempting to
compute more summary values than the sum, min, max, and bucket counts of
OpenTelemetry histograms. The advantage diminishes when attributes are not known
ahead of time.

> When attributes are known ahead of time, none of the systems allocate memory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When attribute values are known ahead of time, none of the systems allocate memory
```

when recording. This is great, and should be table stakes for any serious

> metrics system. When attributes are not known ahead of time (i.e. computed from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metrics system. When attribute values are not known ahead of time (i.e. computed from
```

application context), OpenTelemetry consistently allocates less memory than
prometheus and micrometer. OpenTelemetry has clearly optimized for this scenario

> where micrometer and prometheus have a focus on attributes being known ahead of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where micrometer and prometheus have a focus on attribute values being known ahead of
```

> time and bound instruments. I argue that more often than not, attributes will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
time and bound instruments. I argue that more often than not, attribute values will
```

fewer memory allocations than micrometer and prometheus. Note that prometheus
directly uses the OpenTelemetry OTLP exporter library, but without the
optimization OpenTelemetry is able to achieve by being vertically integrated
(i.e. exporter and core metrics system work together to achieve optimal
results). Micrometer OTLP support translates the in-memory micrometer
representation to generated Java classes before serializing, which is convenient
but suboptimal from a performance standpoint.

Overall, these are three serious metric systems. All perform admirably on the
record side of things - a testament to the performance engineering that’s gone
into all of them. After wrapping up a long series of optimizations,
OpenTelemetry shines on the collect side of things. Its lower allocations will
benefit every application, but are especially important to applications with
high cardinality and with strict performance SLAs.

If you’re reading this and considering Java metric systems, I hope you chose
[opentelemetry-java][]. It’s a powerful and highly performant tool on its own,
but comes with APIs for other key observability signals, a

> [rich instrumentation ecosystem](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/supported-libraries.md),

Reviewer: I think we have a copy of that in docs as well. We also could point to the registry which might have instrumentation libraries outside the instrumentation repo: https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/registry/?language=java&component=instrumentation

Author: There's a section [here](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/libraries/#available-instrumentation-libraries) but it just links to the page I linked to.

> https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/registry/?language=java&component=instrumentation

The registry could work, but for now the markdown page is better. It tells you whether library or autoinstrumentation is supported, and also which semantic conventions are produced. I would love it if the registry could do these things, but don't have time for it at the moment.

Reviewer: Same here, it's a suggestion, so let's leave it as is

---
title: OpenTelemetry Java Metrics Performance Comparison
linkTitle: Java Metric Systems Compared

> date: 2024-05-20

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-05-24
```

Let's make sure that we set the publication date correct.
